---
type: homepage
title: "Spinal user guide"
tags: [user guide]
keywords: spinal, user guide
last_updated: Apr 19, 2016
sidebar: spinal_sidebar
toc: false
permalink: /
---

## Document purpose and structure
This site presents the *Spinal* language and how to use it on concrete examples. This documentation also explains how the language is implemented. The documentation is split into different sections:

1. [Languages principles](/SpinalDoc/) (this document)
1. [Getting started](/SpinalDoc/spinal_getting_started)
1. [Language features](/SpinalDoc/spinal/core/introduction/)
1. [Language libraries](/SpinalDoc/spinal/lib/introduction/)
1. [Some examples](/SpinalDoc/spinal/examples/simple_ones/)

If you are learning the language from scratch, [this presentation](/SpinalDoc/presentation/) is probably a good starting point.

## What is Spinal ?
Spinal is a high-level hardware description language. It can be used as an alternative to VHDL or Verilog and has several advantages over those.

Also Spinal is not a HLS approch, its goal is not to push something abstract into ff and gates, but by using simple elements (ff, gates, if / case statments) create new abstraction level and help the designer to not rewrite always the same thing.

{% include note.html content="Spinal is *fully interoperable* with standard VHDL/Verilog-based EDA tools (simulators and synthetizers) as the output generated by the toolchain could be VHDL or Verilog. <br/><br/>It also enables mixed designs where Spinal components inter-operate with VHDL or Verilog IPs." %}

### Advantages of using Spinal over VHDL / Verilog
As Spinal is based on a high-level language, it provides several advantages to improve your hardware coding:

1. *No more endless wiring* - Create and connect complex buses like AXI in one single line.
1. *Evolving capabilities* - Create your own buses definition and abstraction layer.
1. *Reduce code size* - by a high factor, especially for wiring. This enables you to have a better overview of your code base, increase your productivity and create fewer headaches.
1. *Free and user friendly IDE* - Thanks to scala world for auto-completion, error highlight, navigation shortcut and many others.
1. *Detailed information about your design* - Directly extract information from your digital design and generate reports that contain information about latency and addresses.
1. *Powerful and easy type conversions* - Bidirectional translation between any data type and bits. Useful to load a complex data structure from a CPU interface.
1. *Loop detection* - Tools check for you that there is no combinatorial loop / latch.
1. *Clock domains safety* - The tools inform you that there is no user unintentional cross clock domain.
1. *Generic design* - There are no restrictions to the genericity of your hardware description by using Scala constructs.

### What are the differences between Chisel VS Spinal ?
It is a very good question ! Why develop a new language when there Chisel has been released 3 years ago ?

[Chisel](https://chisel.eecs.berkeley.edu/) is the project at the origin of Spinal and Chisel it represents a big step forward compared to common HDL. However, Chisel has show some serious and persistent conception issue :

#### Various issue :
- When an assignment occur, bits width are automatically resized by Chisel to match. It should at least generate a warning.
- Bundle assignments are weakly typed.
- You can assign Bool, Bits, UInt, Bits together, Chisel will automatically cast them. It should at least generate a warning as well.
- Chisel didn't print any warning when you completely reassign a signals, kind of situation that is clearly the most of the time an user error.
- Can't add attribute into generated verilog
- You can't define function without argument that return a `Data` inside `Bundles`.
- Using `when`/`otherwise` is not strict in all case. This allows you to generate an asynchronous signal that is not assigned in every case.
- You can't assign a given range of bit into a bit vector (UInt,SInt,Bits) in many cases.
- No cross clock domain checking
- You can't define signals inside when scope, which remove the possibility to define local variably and sometime to use functions that need it.
- You can't define signals "inline" like in scala (val toto = False; when(cond){toto := True}).
- Unreadable generated code
- They are now moving to FIRRTL (Chisel 3.0) which remove the possibility to analyse the netlist (latency, delay, connections) during the scala generation phase.
- The library that is integrated into Chisel and that provides you some utils and useful bus definition is a good intention, but could be so better and more complete
- You can't define a Reg of Bundle where some elements have reset values and some doesn't have.

#### Multiple clock support is awkward:
- Working into a single block with multiple clock is difficult, you can't define "ClockingArea", only creating a module allow it.
- Reset wire is not really integrated into the clock domain notion, sub module loose reset of parent, which is really annoying.
- No support of falling edge clock or active low reset.
- No support for asynchronous reset, also nothing for FPGA-bitstream reset (FF loaded by the bitstream)
- No clock enable support.
- Chisel makes the assumption that every clock wire come from the top level inputs, you don't have access to clock signals.

#### Syntax could be better:
- Not pretty literal value syntax, No implicit conversion between Scala and Chisel types.
- Not pretty input/output definition.
- Switch statement doesn't have default case.
- No "Area" notion to give a better structure to the user code.
- No enumeration support, it's currently emulated by using weakly typed UInt.

For some major issues mentioned here, an issue/pull request was open on github, without effect. In addition, if we consider the age (5.5 years at the time of writing) of Chisel, this is a very serious issue and it's why SpinalHDL was created.

## Getting started
Want to try it for yourself? Then jump to the [getting started section](/SpinalDoc/spinal_getting_started) and have fun!
